.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Danilo Abbasciano <danilo@piumalab.org>
.TH SIGILLUM 1 "2026-05-22" "sigillum 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sigillum \- digital signature, timestamping and encryption of documents (PAdES/CAdES/XAdES)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sigillum
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.RI [ COMMAND ]
.RI [ ARGS ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sigillum
is a GTK desktop application for digital signature, timestamping and
encryption of documents according to the ETSI/eIDAS standards. It supports
the
.B PAdES
(signed PDF),
.B CAdES
(.p7m enveloping),
.B XAdES
(XML enveloped) formats, and standalone
.B TSR
(RFC 3161) and
.B TSD
(ETSI TS 119 422) timestamps.
.PP
Without arguments,
.B sigillum
starts the graphical interface. With a subcommand it performs the requested
operation and exits, making it usable from scripts.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B sign \fIFILE\fR [\fI\-\-level B|T|LT\fR] [\fI\-o OUTPUT\fR]
Sign the file. The format is derived from the extension: pdf gives PAdES,
xml gives XAdES, anything else gives CAdES.
.TP
.B verify \fIFILE\fR [\fI\-\-original FILE\fR] [\fI\-\-trusted CA.pem\fR] [\fI\-\-json\fR]
Verify a signature or a timestamp. For .tsr files
.IR \-\-original
is required.
.TP
.B timestamp \fIFILE\fR [\fI\-\-format tsr|tsd\fR]
Timestamp a file via RFC 3161.
.TP
.B encrypt \fIFILE\fR [\fI\-\-mode sym|asym\fR] [\fI\-\-algo NAME\fR] [\fI\-\-recipient CERT\fR]
Encrypt the file. Either symmetric mode (AES-256 default) or asymmetric
(CMS EnvelopedData against a certificate).
.TP
.B decrypt \fIFILE\fR
Decrypt the file. The format (SIGILLUM or CMS) is auto-detected.
.TP
.B tsl-import
Download the AgID Trust List into local PEM bundles.
.TP
.B detect
List the available PKCS#11 drivers, the detected USB tokens and the
certificates on each token.
.TP
.B config show \fR|\fB config set \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Show or modify the persistent configuration (signing device, TSA,
visible signature).
.TP
.B gui
Launch the graphical interface.
.SH COMMON OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print the help message.
.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
Print the version.
.SH SIGN OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-level " { B | T | LT }"
Signature level. B = basic, T = with timestamp, LT = long-term (with
embedded chain and revocation data). Default: B.
.TP
.BI \-\-cert " FILE"
Use the given PKCS#12 (.p12/.pfx) or PEM file.
.TP
.BI \-\-lib " PATH " \-\-cert\-id " ID"
Use the given PKCS#11 token. See
.BR "sigillum detect"
for the value of
.IR ID .
.TP
.BI \-\-tsa " URL"
URL of the Time-Stamp Authority.
.TP
.B \-\-visible
PAdES: draw a visible signature on the PDF (optional logo via
.IR \-\-image ,
position via
.IR \-\-position
or
.IR \-\-box ).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SIGILLUM_PIN
PIN of the PKCS#11 token. If unset,
.B sigillum
asks for it on the terminal.
.TP
.B SIGILLUM_PASSWORD
Password of the PKCS#12 file or of the symmetric encryption.
.TP
.B SIGILLUM_TSA_PASSWORD
HTTP Basic password for the TSA.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Override the configuration directory (default:
.IR ~/.config ).
The configuration lives in
.I ~/.config/sigillum/settings.json
with permissions 0600.
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Override the data directory (default:
.IR ~/.local/share ).
The PEM bundles for the AgID Trust List are in
.IR ~/.local/share/sigillum/trusted/ .
.SH EXAMPLES
Sign a PDF at level T against FreeTSA:
.PP
.nf
.RS
SIGILLUM_PASSWORD=secret sigillum sign document.pdf \\
    \-\-cert mine.p12 \-\-level T \\
    \-\-tsa https://freetsa.org/tsr
.RE
.fi
.PP
Sign a PDF with a YubiKey, applying a visible signature on the
bottom-right corner:
.PP
.nf
.RS
SIGILLUM_PIN=123456 sigillum sign report.pdf \\
    \-\-lib /usr/lib/x86_64\-linux\-gnu/libykcs11.so.2 \\
    \-\-cert\-id 02:9c67ef95f0e64305 \\
    \-\-visible \-\-position bottom-right \-\-image logo.png
.RE
.fi
.PP
Verify a signed file with JSON output:
.PP
.nf
.RS
sigillum verify document.signed.pdf \-\-json
.RE
.fi
.PP
Encrypt symmetrically with AES\-256:
.PP
.nf
.RS
SIGILLUM_PASSWORD=pwd sigillum encrypt secret.txt
.RE
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
success.
.TP
.B 1
user error (wrong argument, missing file, missing configuration).
.TP
.B 2
external-service error (TSA unreachable, network error, signing failed).
.TP
.B 3
signature verification did not succeed (invalid signature or untrusted chain).
.TP
.B 130
interrupted by SIGINT.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/sigillum/settings.json
Persistent configuration (signing device, TSA, visible signature).
Permissions 0600 because it may contain the HTTP Basic password of the TSA.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/sigillum/trusted/it\-eidas\-signing.pem
Bundle of the Italian qualified signer CAs (AgID TSL).
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/sigillum/trusted/it\-eidas\-tsa.pem
Bundle of the Italian qualified TSA CAs.
.SH STANDARDS
.TP
.B ETSI EN 319 142
PAdES (PDF Advanced Electronic Signatures).
.TP
.B ETSI EN 319 122
CAdES (CMS Advanced Electronic Signatures).
.TP
.B ETSI EN 319 132
XAdES (XML Advanced Electronic Signatures).
.TP
.B ETSI TS 119 612
Trusted Lists.
.TP
.B ETSI TS 119 422
TimeStampedData (TSD).
.TP
.B RFC 3161
Time-Stamp Protocol (TSR).
.TP
.B RFC 5652
Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS).
.TP
.B PKCS#11
Cryptographic Token Interface (RSA Labs).
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at:
.UR https://github.com/piuma/sigillum/issues
.UE .
.SH AUTHOR
Danilo Abbasciano <danilo@piumalab.org>.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openssl (1),
.BR pkcs11\-tool (1),
.BR yubico\-piv\-tool (1).
